DOCS-2540: Create Viam Architecture section (#3185)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/architecture/_index.md

---
title: "Viam Architecture"
linkTitle: "Architecture"
weight: 409
type: "docs"
description: "How a machine running on Viam is structured, from on-device to cloud communications."
imageAlt: "Viam architecture"
images: ["/viam/machine-components.png"]
tags: ["components", "services", "communication"]
menuindent: true
---

> 

Reviewer: We need some intro here

Author: How about an "in this page"?

Reviewer: I saw your ticket about adding that more broadly, I don't want to start that for reference pages right now (I don't know if ever tbh, therefore I don't want to start doing it on one page) - it goes out of date too quickly. You can add a normal list without the card.

> ## `viam-server`

Reviewer: This should probably include something about the micro-RDK...?

> ![Viam data, ML and registry in the cloud and Viam fleet and build on-premises. Viam core is the communication layer that connects the cloud to the on-device portion.](/architecture/cloud-premises.png)

Reviewer: I think possibly the one's you have below are a good fit. I don't know that we need more

Author: So delete this and replace with an intro sentence?

`viam-server` is the open-source executable binary that runs on your machine's SBC or other computer.

`viam-server` does the following locally:

- Runs drivers for your hardware
- Runs motion planning and vision services
- Runs {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="module" text="modules" >}}
- Manages local connections between all these resources
- Captures and stores data

When `viam-server` can connect to the cloud, it also:

- Automatically pulls configuration updates you make in the Viam app
- Gets new versions of software packages
- Uploads and syncs image and sensor data

> - Allows you to remotely control your machine from the Viam app

Author: I'm adding "monitor and", and then adding "- Handles requests from client code you write with SDKs" as a separate bullet--lmk if that's no good

> `viam-server` can use the internet (WAN) or local networks (LAN) to establish peer-to-peer connections between two {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="machine" text="machines" >}}, or to a client application.

Reviewer: While the internet is a WAN, it's not correct to imply that's a synonym.
```suggestion
`viam-server` can use the internet, wide area networks (WAN) or local networks (LAN) to establish peer-to-peer connections between two {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="machine" text="machines" >}}, or to a client application.
```

## Components, services, modules

A [_component_](/components/) represents a physical piece of hardware in your {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="machine" text="machine" >}}, and the software that directly supports that hardware.

> A [_service_](/services/) is a software package that makes it easier to add complex capabilities such as motion planning or object detection to your machine.

Author: How about I just say 
```suggestion
A [_service_](/services/) is a software package that adds complex capabilities such as motion planning or object detection to your machine.
```

Viam has many built-in components and services that run within `viam-server`.

A [_modular resource_](/registry/) is a custom component or service, not built into `viam-server` but rather provided by a _module_ that you or another user have created.

> A module runs in parallel to `viam-server` on your machine, communicating over UNIX sockets, and `viam-server` manages its lifecycle.

Reviewer: I don't really think you say "runs in parallel". I don't know if it's started as a child process or something. I think we need to probably check that
```suggestion
A module runs as a process managed by `viam-server` on your machine, communicating over UNIX sockets, and `viam-server` manages its lifecycle.
```

Reviewer: I have checked this, it is run as a child process. So very much not in parallel.
```suggestion
A module runs as a child process managed by`viam-server` on your machine, communicating over UNIX sockets, and `viam-server` manages its lifecycle.
```

> {{<imgproc src="/viam/machine-components.png" resize="x1100" declaredimensions=true alt="Machine structure" style="max-width:600px" >}}

Author: True--there's been discussion around whether to highlight that distinction or not. I think leave for now then revisit?

{{< expand "Click for an example" >}}

Imagine you have a wheeled rover with two motors, a GPS unit, and a camera, controlled by a single-board computer (SBC) such as a Raspberry Pi.

> The motors, GPS, and camera each require software drivers so that signals can be sent to or from them from your board.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The motors, GPS, and camera each require software drivers so that the board can send signals to them and receive signals from them.
```

Author: I feel like this sounds clunkier/more stilted?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The motors, GPS, and camera each require software drivers so that the board can send and receive signals to and from them
```

Author: Okay I’ll do your first suggestion then

These drivers are called _{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="component" text="components" >}}_.
There is also a _component_ for the board itself that allows Viam software to communicate with the pins on the board.

> If you configure a [base component](/components/base/), you can specify the size of the wheels attached to the motors, and how wide the rover base is, so `viam-server` can calculate how to coordinate the motion of the rover base.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

If you configure a [base component](/components/base/), you can specify the size of the wheels attached to the motors, and how wide the rover base is, so `viam-server` can calculate how to coordinate the motion of the rover base.
```

> If your rover includes a piece of hardware (such as a particular sensor) that is not yet supported in Viam, write a {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="module" text="module" >}} to integrate it into your machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your rover includes a piece of hardware (such as a particular sensor) that is not yet supported in Viam, you can integrate it by writing a {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="module" text="module" >}} for it.
```

> Now imagine you want to run code to send you an email when the temperature sensor reads over 100 degrees Fahrenheit:

Reviewer: This isn't a great example because you'd actually not want to run code, you'd want to configure a Trigger that does this. However I can't think of a better example either right now.

Author: Good point

Author: I mean it could be same sensor example, but you want to run code to spin up a custom dashboard instead of send you a notification?

Say you want your machine to navigate intelligently between GPS coordinates.

> Instead of writing code from scratch, use Viam's built-in navigation service by adding it to your configuration, specifying how the GPS and any additional movement sensors are oriented with respect to your hardware.

Reviewer: (you're not actually telling them to do this here, you're telling them about possibilities)
```suggestion
Instead of writing code from scratch, you can use Viam's built-in navigation service by adding it to your configuration, specifying how the GPS and any additional movement sensors are oriented with respect to your hardware.
```

> Since your configuration now includes information about the wheeled base of your rover as well as how that base is oriented in relation to your GPS and other sensors, `viam-server` can use the motion and navigation services to calculate how much power to send to each motor to get it to a point on the map.

Reviewer: It did already for at least a paragraph and you just added a different service so I think remove the now
```suggestion
Since your configuration includes information about the wheeled base of your rover as well as how that base is oriented in relation to your GPS and other sensors, `viam-server` can use the motion and navigation services to calculate how much power to send to each motor to get it to a point on the map.
```

If you want to add some other high-level software functionality beyond the built-in services (for example, your own flavor of navigation service), you can add your own service with a module.

{{< /expand >}}

> ## Communication

Reviewer: This whole section... We should get this reviewed by an SME. Shawn might know enough to function as an SME for that. I don't know if Bill or Felix can too

## `viam-server`

`viam-server` is the open-source executable binary that runs on your machine's SBC or other computer.

> `viam-server` can run your machine without any connection to the internet; it contains all the drivers for your hardware, and it manages local connections between hardware drivers, runs motion planning and vision services locally, and captures and stores data locally.

Reviewer: I don't think saying it contains all the drivers is entirely true. Because modules aren't a part of viam-server

However, for most use cases you'll want `viam-server` to connect to the cloud so that it can:

- Automatically pull configuration updates you make in the Viam app
- Get new versions of software packages
- Upload and sync image and sensor data
- Allow you to remotely control your machine from the Viam app

## Components, services, modules

A _component_ represents a physical piece of hardware in your {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="machine" text="machine" >}}, and the software that directly supports that hardware.

A _service_ is a software package that makes it easier to add complex capabilities such as motion planning or object detection to your machine.

Viam has many built-in components and services that run within `viam-server`.

> A _modular resource_ is a custom component or service, not built into `viam-server` but rather provided by a _module_ that you or another user have created.

Reviewer: this is very good

> The Viam app hits the same API endpoints as your SDK client code, with `viam-server` handling requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Viam app uses the same API endpoints as your SDK client code (in fact, it uses the Viam TypeScript SDK), with `viam-server` handling requests.
```

> This is what enables Viam to provide SDKs in a variety of different programming languages.

Reviewer 2: I might drop this sentence?  
A RESTful API would easily allow one to create SDKs in various programming languages, as well.

For more details, see [Machine-to-Machine Communication](/architecture/machine-to-machine-comms/).

### Security

> TLS certificates certificates provided by the Viam app ensure that all communication is authenticated and encrypted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TLS certificates certificates automatically provided by the Viam app ensure that all communication is authenticated and encrypted.
```
Also consider mentioning that they are created individually at the location level, for added security.

Author: Can you provide more info here? I'd like to move it to active voice, i.e. "The app creates..." if that's correct. I also don't know what it means that it creates them individually?

> TLS certificates certificates provided by the Viam app ensure that all communication is authenticated and encrypted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TLS certificates provided by the Viam app ensure that all communication is authenticated and encrypted.
```

Viam uses API keys with [role-based access control (RBAC)](/cloud/rbac/) to control access to machines from client code.

## Data management flow

{{<imgproc src="/architecture/data-flow.svg" resize="x1100" declaredimensions=true alt="Data flowing from local disk to cloud to the Viam app, SDKs, and MQL and SQL queries." >}}
<br>

Data is captured and synced to the Viam cloud as follows:

> 1. Data collected by your components, such as sensors and cameras, is first stored locally in a specified directory (defaults to <file>~/.viam/capture</file>).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Data collected by your resources, such as sensors and cameras, is first stored locally in a specified directory (defaults to <file>~/.viam/capture</file>).
```
Since it can be for services as well

>    You control how often to capture data and where to store it using the configuration file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   You control what data to capture, how often to capture it, and where to store it using the configuration in the Viam app.
```
What configuration file?

>    - You can also sync data from other sources by putting it into this folder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - You can also sync data from other sources by putting it into folders you specify.
```

     <br><br>

> 1. `viam-server` syncs data to a MongoDB database in the cloud at your specified interval, and deletes the data from the local directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `viam-server` syncs data to the cloud at your specified interval, and deletes the data from the local directory.
```
It does store metadata and perhaps tabular data in mongodb, but not images and other binary data, so maybe leave out MongoDB as that could be a red flag for some as they know data stored in mongodb is expensive

## Complex machine with many sub-parts

In Viam, a _{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="part" text="part" >}}_ is an organizational concept consisting of one instance of `viam-server` running on a SBC or other computer, and all the hardware and software that that `viam-server` instance controls.

Many simple {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="machine" text="machines" >}} consist of only one part: just one computer running `viam-server`.
If you have a more complex situation with multiple computers and associated hardware working together, you have two options for organization:

- One complex {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="machine" text="machine" >}} consisting of multiple parts, working together.
- Multiple individual machines, linked by a {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="remote-part" text="remote" >}} connection.

These two options are very similar; in both cases, the parts communicate with each other securely using gRPC/{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="webrtc" text="WebRTC" >}}.

Because the parts are interconnected, you can write SDK code that establishes a connection with one of them and controls them all in a coordinated way.

> TODO: Find a good example, and explain why you'd want to use one multi-part machine versus many single-part machines

Reviewer: Also forwarded you an email about this

> TODO: Find a good example, and explain why you'd want to use one multi-part machine versus many single-part machines

Reviewer 3: A good example is when you want one part controlling the rest. I wonder if the android example for Caldo could be used. @williamjhyland any chance you want to explain that architecture?

> TODO: Find a good example, and explain why you'd want to use one multi-part machine versus many single-part machines

Author: Sure but more concretely, what's one very specific example of when you'd want that?

  Your code connects to the machine, authenticating with API keys, and uses the [sensor API](/components/sensor/#api) to get readings and the [motor API](/components/motor/#api) to turn the motor on and off.

  ![A desktop computer (client in this case) sends commands to robot 1 (server) with gRPC over wifi.](/build/program/sdks/robot-client.png)

Now, imagine you want to change to a different model of temperature sensor from a different brand:

- You power down your device, disconnect the old sensor from your SBC and connect the new one.
- You update your configuration in the Viam app to indicate what model you are using, and how it's connected (imagine this one uses USB instead of GPIO pins).
- You turn your device back on, and `viam-server` automatically fetches the config updates.
- You do not need to change your SDK code, because the API is the same for all models of sensor.

## Complex machines with multiple parts

In Viam, a _{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="part" text="part" >}}_ is an organizational concept consisting of one instance of `viam-server` running on a SBC or other computer, and all the hardware and software that that `viam-server` instance controls.

> Many simple {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="machine" text="machines" >}} consist of only one part: just one computer running `viam-server`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many simple {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="machine" text="machines" >}} consist of only one part: just one computer running `viam-server` with configured components and services.
```

When you control your machine or view its camera streams or sensor outputs from the Viam app **CONTROL** tab, those connections happen over WebRTC.
The Viam app hits the same API endpoints as your SDK client code, with `viam-server` handling requests.

{{% alert title="Security" color="info" %}}
TLS certificates certificates provided by the app ensure that all communication is authenticated and encrypted.
{{% /alert %}}

For more details, see [Machine-to-Machine Communication](/architecture/machine-to-machine-comms/).

## Data management flow

> TODO: Data flow diagram

Reviewer: will send you a slack with a diagram bill used around this

Author: Maybe the simple machine diagram higher up covers it?

Reviewer: Hmm. Maybe simplified would help? I think maybe you want to also bring into it a visual that shows the cache on the device (with a label cache). As well as query options?

Author: Hmm how would query options fit in? You mean like, add in a client workstation to the diagram that is requesting data from the cloud?

Author: ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c23af511-98a6-492d-8821-540f5b8ed60a)
might actually be good

When you control your machine or view its camera streams or sensor outputs from the Viam app **CONTROL** tab, those connections happen over WebRTC.
The Viam app hits the same API endpoints as your SDK client code, with `viam-server` handling requests.

{{% alert title="Protobuf APIs" color="info" %}}
All Viam APIs are defined with the [Protocol Buffers (protobuf)](https://protobuf.dev/) framework.
This is what enables Viam to provide SDKs in a variety of different programming languages.
{{% /alert %}}

For more details, see [Machine-to-Machine Communication](/architecture/machine-to-machine-comms/).

### Security

TLS certificates certificates provided by the Viam app ensure that all communication is authenticated and encrypted.

Viam uses API keys with [role-based access control (RBAC)](/fleet/rbac/) to control access to machines from client code.

## Data management flow

{{<imgproc src="/architecture/data-flow.svg" resize="x1100" declaredimensions=true alt="Data flowing from local disk to cloud to the Viam app, SDKs, and MQL and SQL queries." >}}
<br>

> Here's how data flows in Viam:

Reviewer: don't start sentences with here

```suggestion
Data is captured and synced to the Viam Cloud as follows:
```

Author: ```suggestion
Data is captured and synced to the Viam cloud as follows:
```

1. Data collected by your components, such as sensors and cameras, is first stored locally in a specified directory (defaults to <file>~/.viam/capture</file>).
   You control how often to capture data and where to store it using the configuration file.

   - You can also sync data from other sources by putting it into this folder.
     <br><br>

1. `viam-server` syncs data to a MongoDB database in the cloud at your specified interval, and deletes the data from the local directory.

1. You can view your data from the Viam app or query it using Viam SDKs, MQL, or SQL.

> If a device has intermittent internet connectivity, no data is lost because it is stored locally until the machine can reconnect to the cloud.

Reviewer: That's not accurate. Eventually the disk is full and data is lost, so how about
```suggestion
If a device has intermittent internet connectivity, datais stored locally until the machine can reconnect to the cloud.
```

That is accurate without making the same guarantee

Author: ```suggestion
If a device has intermittent internet connectivity, data is stored locally until the machine can reconnect to the cloud.
```

For more information, see [Data Management](/services/data/).

## Basic machine example

<p>
{{<imgproc src="/architecture/simple-machine.png" class="alignright" resize="x1100" declaredimensions=true alt="viam-server running on a board connected to a sensor. Data is stored on a local folder and synced to a folder in the Viam app cloud." style="max-width:400px" >}}
</p>

Imagine you have a simple device consisting of a temperature sensor connected to the GPIO pins of a single-board computer (SBC).
You want to capture sensor data at regular intervals, and sync it to the cloud.
Here is how this works in Viam:

> - You create a configuration file in the Viam app that includes:
>   - A sensor {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="component" text="component" >}}
>     - Configure which pins of the SBC the sensor is connected to.
>   - Data management {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="service" text="service" >}}
>     - Configure the intervals at which to capture and sync data.

Reviewer: remove unnecessary detail
```suggestion
- You create a configuration file in the Viam app that includes a sensor {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="component" text="component" >}} and the Data management {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="service" text="service" >}}.
```

Author: I included this to give people an idea of what the configuration even is

- `viam-server` runs on the SBC, managing all communications between hardware and the cloud using gRPC over {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="webrtc" text="WebRTC" >}}.
  On startup, `viam-server` uses credentials stored locally to establish a connection with the Viam app and fetches its configuration.

> - Sensor data is cached in a local folder, then synced to the cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Sensor data is cached in a local folder, then synced to the cloud at a configurable interval.
```

- You can use the tools in the Viam app to remotely view sensor data as well as to change your machine's configuration, to view logs, and more.

> Now imagine you want to run code to turn on a fan when the temperature sensor reads over 100 degrees Fahrenheit:

Reviewer: this is a great example

- Configure the fan motor as a motor component and wire the fan motor relay to the same board as the sensor.
- Write your script using one of the Viam [SDKs](/sdks/), for example the Viam Python SDK, using the sensor API and motor API.

> - You then run this code either locally on the SBC, or on a separate computer such as a laptop.

Reviewer: For production use cases they'd likely be running it on some server
```suggestion
- You then run this code either locally on the SBC, or on a separate server.
```

>   Either way, you include a few lines of code at the top of your script that set up a connection to your machine's `viam-server` instance so you can access the sensor component and use the [sensor API](/components/sensor/#api) to get readings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Your code connects to the machine and uses the [sensor API](/components/sensor/#api) to get readings and the [motor API](/components/motor/#api) to turn the motor on and off.
```

Author: ```suggestion
  Your code connects to the machine, authenticating with API keys, and uses the [sensor API](/components/sensor/#api) to get readings and the [motor API](/components/motor/#api) to turn the motor on and off.
```

## Complex machines with multiple parts

In Viam, a _{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="part" text="part" >}}_ is an organizational concept consisting of one instance of `viam-server` running on a SBC or other computer, and all the hardware and software that that `viam-server` instance controls.

Many simple {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="machine" text="machines" >}} consist of only one part: just one computer running `viam-server`.
If you have a more complex situation with multiple computers and associated hardware working together, you have two options for organization:

- One complex {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="machine" text="machine" >}} consisting of multiple parts, working together.
- Multiple individual machines, linked by a {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="remote-part" text="remote" >}} connection.

These two options are very similar; in both cases, the parts communicate with each other securely and directly using gRPC/{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="webrtc" text="WebRTC" >}}.

Because the parts are interconnected, you can write SDK code that establishes a connection with one of them and controls them all in a coordinated way.

> {{< expand "Multi-part and remote examples" >}}

Reviewer: These are great

- **Compute power example:** Imagine you have a robotic arm with a camera on it, connected to a SBC such as a Raspberry Pi.
  You want to use the Viam motion service to control the arm, and you want to use the vision service on the output from the camera, but the SBC does not have the compute power to plan complex motion and also interpret camera output quickly.

>   You can set up a second {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="part" text="part" >}} on a desktop or laptop computer, as a sub-part of the same machine, and offload the heavy compute to that part.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  You can set up a second {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="part" text="part" >}} on a server, as a sub-part of the same machine, and offload the heavy compute to that part.
```

- **One weather station to many boats:** Imagine you have one weather station collecting data, and multiple boats (perhaps some in different {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="organization" text="organizations" >}}) whose behavior depends on that weather data.

>   You can set up a remote connection from each of the `viam-server` instances running on the boats to the `viam-server` instance on the weather station and get that data more directly, without having to wait for the data to synced to the cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  You can set up a remote connection from each of the `viam-server` instances running on the boats to the `viam-server` instance on the weather station and get that data more directly, without having to wait for the data to sync to the cloud.
```

menuindent: true
---

This page provides an overview of how a machine is structured, including on-device and cloud communications:

- [`viam-server`](#viam-server)
- [Components, services and modules](#components-services-modules)
- [Communication flow and security](#communication)
- [How data flows in Viam](#data-management-flow)
- [Basic machine example](#basic-machine-example)
- [Structure of more complex machines](#complex-machines-with-multiple-parts)

> ## `viam-server`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `viam-server` and the micro-RDK
```
